On God and Meaning

David Maurice Garrett


The term meaning is a word that summarily ties the perceiver and the object together.  I usually wind up wondering if it is we humans who give meaning to the world or if it is the world that gives meaning to us?   Eventually, it comes down to, whatever the case may be – why?  Why does there need to be meaning at all?

The best answer to this that I have been able to formulate has to do with thinking of the universe as God.  When I say God I must, out of necessity, explain what I mean by God.  In my religious research I have found that humans can be loosely divided into two camps: 1) those that believe God is outside of his creation (Christians, Jews, Muslims, et al) and 2) those that believe God is inside of his creation (Hindus, Buddhists, Taoists, et al).  But I must further elaborate what I mean by inside and outside of his creation.  Keep in mind that we are not talking about inside and outside of God.  There can be nothing outside of God.  What would you call something that is outside of God?  Not God?  We are talking about God existing inside of his creation or outside of his creation.

Camp 1 believes that God’s creation is outside of God (which I say is impossible). In my experience, most Christian’s, Jews, and Muslims truly believe that God is outside looking in. Almost like he built a fish tank and he sits outside of it watching us fish swim about. Occasionally, he will stick his hand in as he sees fit to work in some “mysterious” way that we can’t comprehend. This is supported by the fact that they believe good and evil to be separate entities and that God cannot be anything evil.

Now, if you believe in God being omnipresent then it is illogical for you to hold a world-view of the one I just stated.  It simply cannot withstand logic for God to be everywhere and everything at once and still not be a part of his creation.

Camp 2 believes that God’s creation is actually composed of God (which I say is what we mean by omnipresent). This is the view that most Hindus, Buddhist, and Taoist have. In this view anything evil is equally composed of God as anything good.

I am not saying that people in the East are evil because they think this way.  I believe that the terms evil and good are based solely on the meaning we place on the object of our perception.

Let us think of it in this way – suppose that God were represented by a body of water. Nothing exists outside of the body of water. Floating inside the water is a sponge (this represents our universe). The water fills the sponge. We, in our sponge-world, cannot perceive anything outside of the sponge.  In this way God permeates the sponge. Before the sponge was in the water there was only God. So God “decided” to create the sponge but the sponge cannot be introduced from outside the water, because we said that there couldn’t exist anything outside of God that isn’t considered a part of God.  The sponge must be built from within the water. 

Therefore God is omnipresent because he is not only everywhere at once, he is everything at once.

There could be a good argument made that what lies outside of creation is God’s consciousness or spirit and he is exerting his will in the act of creating his creation.  This is what I meant by “decision” to create.  In this case the water could be considered to be God’s consciousness and the sponge our universe.  If this is the case then God is still composing everything and transcends what we might consider everything in the universal sense.  We cannot directly perceive anything outside our universe.

So we must ask ourselves, why are we necessary to God anyway? The answer lies, once again, in perception. God needs us in order to exist. I do not mean need in the sense of wants and needs but in the sense of conditional need.  We are a necessary condition for God’s existence in some way.  If we weren't here as little sentient beings then God wouldn't exist. It is like the old saying, "If a tree falls in the woods and no one is there to hear it, does it make a sound?" Well, "If a God exists in the universe and there is no one there to perceive him, does he exist?" 

Once again I return to meaning.  If we think about the tree in logical fashion then we can say that yes, the tree would still make a sound.  But, if there is no one there to perceive the sound then meaning is never ascribed to the tree’s falling as producing sound.  There can be many different levels of meaning ranging from a bird’s startled reaction of flying away to a human’s logical analysis of the sound belonging to a tree.

Sound cannot be produced if the sound waves never strike an eardrum and are converted to neural firings to the brain thus converted to meaning. No eardrum, no sound.  A bird may not possess the more elaborate meaning we do but it is still placing meaning in its own way.  Even if it’s “loud noise equals danger”.

Another argument might be raised at this point.  Suppose we place a tape recorder in the forest, would it record a sound even if no one were there?  Of course it would but that doesn’t really change anything.  There is still no sound until someone listens to the tape and, once again, places meaning to what is heard.

All you are doing is adding additional steps between object and perceiver. Ex 1) Tree falls – air is disturbed – sound waves are produced – sound waves hit tympanic membrane – neural paths fire – brain interprets sound. Ex 2) Tree falls – air is disturbed – sound waves are produced – sound waves hit microphone – electrical signal is recorded on magnetic tape – tape is played - sound waves hit tympanic membrane – neural paths fire – brain interprets sound.

But my line of reasoning goes back to the “decision” to create the sponge in the first place.  You will see that if we bring this issue of object/perceiver/meaning to bear on God that it will present a most unusual conundrum.

The God Conundrum

Instead of approaching this argument from man’s perspective, let’s try to think of it from God’s perspective. Also, you will see that we have, throughout this discussion, been speaking of God being all of creation. So, it is not necessary to separate the object being perceived from God. From the human standpoint the object is synonymous with God. Humans are too, if you really think about it. The conundrum arises that if we weren’t here then God would have no one to perceive him, thus he would be alone. But how does God, being everything, create a perceiver that is both separate from himself and still be considered a part of himself? Don’t you see? God has to give himself meaning? In essence, God has to perceive himself while still maintaining a dualism of perceiver and object.

God had to do this by creating a universe for the purpose of supporting a perceiver, which thinks it is separate from God, the object, but is actually composed of God.
